thanks to Skillshare for making this
video possible Skillshare is an online
community where you can learn almost
anything including many of the skills
used to make this video the first 300
people to click the link in the
description get a 2 month free trial
some consider the period just before the
jet age to be a golden era for air
travel but flying aboard a piston
powered propeller aircraft well it
wasn't always glamorous flights took a
lot longer than they do today and the
relentless noise and vibration from the
piston engines while it was exhausting
and most aircraft couldn't fly high
enough to avoid bad weather so you'd be
in for a bumpy ride and you'd better
have your air sickness bag ready
but then seemingly out of nowhere
in 1949 along came a new kind of
aircraft it was sleek quiet in nearly
twice as fast as some conventional
airliners cruising at 40,000 feet it
could avoid messy weather this was the
de Havilland comet it's shattered
conventional thinking and proved that
jet travel was the future but the
excitement would be short-lived because
within months things started to go
seriously wrong and the leap into the
jet age wouldn't go as smoothly as hope
[Music]
in the 1940s the British set out to
change civil aviation in fact they
really had no choice because after the
Second World War American manufacturers
at the Civil Aviation market cornered at
one point ninety percent of the world's
airline passengers were flying aboard
these American built Douglas dc-3s the
Americans left the Second World War with
a lot of experience designing and
building military transport aircraft
after the war with their industry fully
intact manufacturers could switch to
producing civil aircraft based on their
military transport designs but Britain
on the other hand had to rebuild much of
its focus during the war had been on
building heavy bombers so it now needed
to develop the infrastructure and the
expertise to compete in the civil
aviation market if the British were
going to become leaders in aerospace
they had better come up with something
extraordinary but a jet powered airliner
that was dismissed by a lot of people
the conventional thinking of the day
amongst manufacturers and airlines was
that jet engines produced too little
power relative to their fuel consumption
and they were just too unreliable for
civil aviation but at the same time
piston engines were approaching their
limits to squeeze out ever more power
they had grown large and complex with
superchargers and dozens of cylinders
this made piston powered propeller
engines increasingly expensive to
maintain and you can only spin a
propeller so fast before its efficiency
starts to diminish as part of a larger
effort to develop Britain's post-war
aviation industry the de Havilland
Aircraft Company was awarded the task of
building the world's first jet-powered
airliner
there are crafts which would later be
named the comet was developed in secrecy
in fact untenable designs were
deliberately used to confuse competitors
so when the comet was revealed just
three years later in the summer of 1949
it's done the world
it's sleek lines swept wings and for
integrated turbojet engines well they
were straight out of the future even
today a lot of this aircraft looks
pretty modern so you can only imagine
the impression it would have left on the
flying public in 1952
the comet sent a powerful signal to the
world about Britain's newfound
superiority in aerospace orders poured
in and even in America where airlines
were still skeptical of jets Pan Am
placed orders for a larger lengthened
version the comet was revolutionary
because it had to solve the key barrier
to efficient jet travel while turbo jets
consumed enormous amounts of fuel at
lower altitudes where most planes of the
e.r a flew the comet would instead
cruise at an unprecedented 40,000 feet
where the air is thin and there's less
drag allowing the comet to consume much
less fuel but to allow its passengers to
breathe at such high altitude the cabin
needed to be pressurized and while the
comment wasn't the first airliner to
have a pressurized cabin no other flew
so high the comet went into service in
1952 and immediately began breaking
travel time records and in doing so it
became a point of national pride for the
British public but here's the thing in
some ways the comet was a little too
ahead of its time with such a clean
sheet design there were suddenly so many
new variables to work with there were
numerous problems with its electrical
and hydraulic systems but when two
comets skidded off the runway in 1952
and 53 the pilots were blamed it was
suspected that they were still flying
the comet as if it were a piston powered
airliner over rotating the aircraft on
takeoff it was later determined that a
design change of the leading edge of the
comet's wing was needed but public
confidence in the comet had not been
shaken and the British remained
enthusiastic about jet-powered air
travel but then just two months later
another incident in this time far more
catastrophic a comet leaving Calcutta
ominously disintegrated while flying
through a severe thunderstorm and only
eight months later another comet
exploded shortly after taking off from
Rome after these rapid succession of
incidents Bo I see the airline
the most common service had no choice
but to ground their fleet the focus
shifted to his suspect turbine explosion
in one of the engines so the engine
housing on the other comets was
reinforced but public confidence still
remained high and when the comet
re-entered service airlines had no
trouble selling seats yet just three
months later another comet disintegrated
over the Mediterranean now the entire
worldwide fleet of comments had to be
grounded as their certificate of
airworthiness was revoked an
unprecedented ly large investigation
began and it would reveal that sudden
catastrophic depressurization of the
Comets cabin was to blame essentially
causing comets to suddenly explode apart
in midair see the Comets cycles of
pressurization and depressurization were
faster than those of any other aircraft
after many cycles the fuselage began to
fatigue and cracks started to form
especially around the comet square
windows where hard-edged corners
concentrated stress forces the entire
comet fleet was grounded for a year as
well the investigation lumbered forward
but in the end none of the grounded
planes would ever fly again
and while de Havilland worked to modify
its design switching to round windows
and increasing fuselage thickness the
rest of the world was catching up
aircraft manufacturers from around the
world introduced their own jet-powered
offerings in in 1958 the Boeing 707
entered service and Douglas began
producing the dc-8 that same year the de
Havilland comet 4 entered service but it
couldn't compete with the American
offerings which were now larger faster
and more efficient only 76 comet 4s were
ever delivered to Airlines that compares
to over 500 dc-8 and over a thousand 707
s america stranglehold on the civil
aviation market would only grow tighter
in the coming decades according to de
Havilland's chief test pilot Boeing and
Douglas both privately admitted that
they had learned from the Comets
pressurization problems and if it were
not for the comet they could have made
the same mistakes the later larger and
improved
Komets would reliably serve airlines
into the 60s and 70s the comet lastly
commercial passengers in 1980 but
there's no question that the comet paved
the way the British had taken a massive
risk and brought the world into the jet
age
[Music]
a lot of people ask how I put together
these videos so I'd like to share with
you some insights and to plug our
sponsor Skillshare Skillshare is an
amazing online learning community with
over 17,000 courses covering just about
anything you can think of from video
production to how to start and grow a
YouTube channel it's easy to assume that
to create impressive visuals you need to
first become an expert in one single
piece of software like Adobe After
Effects of course that helps but
personally I think for someone just
starting out a better approach is to
instead learn the basics of a few
different tools so you can get right
down to creating I used several pieces
of software to make this video and I'm
not an expert in any of them but I know
the strengths of each tool and when I
want to learn something new
I often rely on video tutorials and
scale share is an excellent resource you
can get started with introductory
courses like learning the ins and outs
of illustrator or you can learn advanced
techniques like how to use a 3d camera
in After Effects with such a huge
selection of courses on offer you don't
need to waste your time and energy
searching for instructions hidden
somewhere on some message board blog
post or YouTube video for the first 300
viewers who sign up for scale share
using the link in the description will
get two months of learning for free
after that it's just ten dollars a month
whatever your passion skills share have
got you covered
[Music]